>> Right, so our agenda for this afternoon's session
is I'm going to give a brief overview of what we're doing
in the scientific computing for Mac OS X market.
Simon Patience is going to give us a nice presentation
on technology and trends in scientific computing.
You'll also see a few really nice demos from our customers
and developers, which I think you'll really enjoy.
We'll do a quick summary and hopefully we'll have time for
Q and A. So please think about some interesting questions
for the presenters while we're going through
the session and we'll get to that at the end.
So it's been a another year since
we've been here last year talking.
And there's been a lot going on in the market.
I wanted to first start out with some
what I think is really good news.
And you guys may not see data like this very
often, especially at the developer conference.
We poll the market about once
a year to see how Mac is doing.
And one of the reasons why this is
relevant today is because what's essential
to our success is what you guys are doing for the platform.
And I think you see that what we're doing is really working.
If you look at our total market share growth,
it's gone from 15 percent to 19 percent.
And that may not seem huge, but it actually is a big deal,
because the more we get the more we'll continue to get.
It's really particularly good in, in the
academic segment and in the government segment,
where you can see our growth is fantastic.
Industry we have a little bit of work to do still.
But I'll talk about how we're, in some of our
programs we hope to continue to address that
and hopefully make some more in roads
there as we continue into the next year.
Another piece of data that I'm showing you
is just how many people use Mac in their day
to day work, in the lab, for scientific research.
And its really about 45 percent of all
scientists use a Mac on a daily basis.
They don't all own a Mac, but they all use one.
So we're really touching a lot of people out there.
And I really think again that this has so much to do
with the fantastic applications that you all are bringing
to the platform, especially as we add
features to Mac OS X and to the hardware.
So how do we partner with our developers?
I wanted to talk a little bit about this and just some
of the new things we're doing this year as well as some
of the stuff we do every year, but
I'll just remind you for those of you
that haven't been here before and heard my, my talk.
Just starting with conferences and trade shows, there's the
standard national conferences and big shows like Society
for Neuroscience, which we'll be doing this fall.
But what we also do some market specific ones.
And again, looking back at the previous
slide, how do we address industry?
Bringing some of your solutions with our solutions in
front of customers at a conference like Drug Discovery
and Development which is really focused on
the pharmaceutical and biotech industry.
We also participate in some user group meetings.
And these are specifically ones that you all put on.
So if you have user group meetings that you think
would be valuable for, for Apple to participate in,
please let us know and we'd be happy to think about
it and look at a way that we could play a role.
And another thing we've done are
some institution specific events,
again bringing in our partners
to talk about their applications.
The one I'm showing on the screen is one at
the NIH, they have a training session program
where they invite industry people to come and participate.
So we've done that too, really nice audience there.
Another element of what we've been doing this year
are providing more what we call seminars online.
These are available on the Apple dot com
website, at seminars dot apple dot com.
And we're really focusing on more of
a how to element, to bring people in.
The first is about how to build a cluster.
This is simple in so many ways, but it really is helpful.
So its you know basically how you plug
everything in, how you wrap the servers and so on.
But we also partnered with the bio team
to talk about their application Inquiry
which runs on an Apple workgroup cluster.
And the second one is Getting Started
with OsiriX which for those of you
who don't know is a fantastic open
source medical visualization application.
And this is a radiologist presenting how you download
and use this application from the get go on a Mac.
We're really interested in doing more types of these, so
again, very open to your ideas on what might be useful
and ways to really reach out and touch this community.
Another pretty interesting initiative we've done is
something called the technology immersion program,
getting back to this industrial type customer and
pharmaceutical and so pharmaceutical and biotech industry.
You know how do we get them to
just take a look at our hardware,
take a look at the applications that
you guys are making for Mac OS X.
Because we know that that once they
get it in their hands, they like it.
They want it and they're compelled by it and they
can see that it really is a viable option for them.
And more than a viable option, actually a preferable option.
And so our goal here was to put
these systems in their hands.
Our first area of focus was computational
chemistry, because over the past year
or so we've gotten some fantastic
applications, put it over to Mac OS X.
So a very nice suite of applications for
making a computational chemistry workstation.
So the customer gets the MacPro
with 30 inch Cinema Display,
a bunch of apps for chemistry, a
bunch of apps for productivity.
And we leave it to them and their IT group to set it up, get
it started and use it for a few months to see how it works.
What we get back is we get feedback.
Is it really all that we think it is?
Is there anything else we need
to do to make it a viable option?
And we get access to their IT groups.
So here's a bunch of IT people that may
not have considered even touching a Mac
or they're completely Windows or
LINUX or both centric, but not Mac.
And they, they engage with the system, the see that it's not
impossible, or even that difficult to get it on the network.
And it's a really, it's a really interesting
program that's working quite well for us.
This is a very different type of
program, switching gears a little bit.
Our Apple distinguished scientist program.
This is a brand new program that's really
being headed up by our higher ed science group.
And what they're looking at is how do we find
ambassadors out to the scientific community
for Apple that have more a voice to the customer.
And these are really the people who are using Apple
technology for doing hardcore research themselves.
And so the goal here with this program, these
awards, is to find these ambassadors if you will
and learn from them, hear back from them as almost an
advisory group and also have them talk out to our customers
for us about how they use the technology and just represent
Apple in a much more industry, scientifically focused way.
I want to talk a little bit about our website.
We speak most often through our
website, Apple dot com slash science.
And I wanted to spend a few minutes today because we have
recently redesigned this, to take you on a, a quick tour.
Some I'm going to go over here and we're going to switch
over to one of these demo systems magically.
Hello? Ah ha!
There we go.
( Laughter )
Now I can't see it, fantastic.
Okay, so, I'll be able to do this.
So this is the new home page.
What we did was we really wanted
to make it more interactive.
And again, have a better way to highlight what our
developers are doing and solutions and focus on solutions
on the platform, not just the hardware and the software.
But what is a scientist going to do with hardware and software.
So some new sections of better sections I should say,
because they all were here before
pretty much, is software for science.
Let's take a look at that.
and you can see there's just a, it's much more visually
appealing, its much more engaging and its easier
to find applications that you're looking for.
And what I really like in addition is you know you can break
it down by discipline here, but also if what they're looking
for isn't right there, they can just click right
there into the Mac Products Guide and do a search.
I'm going to mentioned the Mac Products
Guide at the end as well.
But if you haven't updated your application and
your description or even have your application
in the Mac Products Guide, please put it there.
People do use this.
And if they don't find it there, they just assume
that your application doesn't run on a Mac.
So another thing that I think is pretty
interesting is the science solutions section.
Excuse me.
Here we're taking a look at different disciplines
and saying how are people using the hardware again
and what should they be, what kind of
applications work, what should they buy.
Let's just take a quick look at medical imaging.
I think this is a fantastic example.
What you can see it just goes into a lot
more detail and then there's your partners
and suggested software applications for
that particular area of focus right there.
And then the profiles page, and the profiles are these
customer profiles we often get great ideas from you
and we profile our developers, customers,
somebody who's using a fantastic application
and the Mac to do research, interesting research.
We're always open to new ideas if you've
got suggestions, please let us know.
This is one the most popular parts
of Apple dot com slash science.
It gets more traffic than any other part.
People love these profiles.
And this is just a much better navigation to search
out different topics and all of these go much deeper.
So we like to keep this up to date and
add new profiles as often as possible.
So again, please if you've got some new ideas or customers
you'd like, you'd like to suggest, then let us know.
The final thing I'll talk about is inside the image.
Now this is pretty different, but
it's also been quite popular.
Its our really look at how art meets science.
And we're in this part of the website,
these are small columns.
They're interview style where we talk a scientist that
has, that has come up with or used a particular image
to convey a concept or an idea with scientific base and talk
about how they come up with it, how they made the image,
what went into it, a little of the,
you know the, the art side of things.
And again, it's been really compelling
and we get a lot of information
and discussion about this art meets science idea.
So with that, I'm going to go back to my other slides.
I just wanted to give you a sense of
some of the new elements on the website.
And encourage you to check it out
if you haven't already done so.
Okay, so let's talk about the communities.
Most of you have heard of some of these, but we have three
main areas I think are worth talking about a little bit.
Mac Research, and I'll talk more about that
in the next slide, Mac enterprise dot org,
which is more focused on the IT side of things as
opposed to the research side of things with Mac research.
And the developer connection.
These are all areas where you're going to find great community,
great information about scientific computing as a developer.
Mac research is really a fantastic success.
Now this almost, it's about two years old this month.
It started in June of 2005 this was launched.
And today they have over 2000 active users.
They get 30000 unique visitors a month
and over 200000 page views a month.
This is a fantastic place for you to
be talking about your application.
If you have a customer that can write a review
of your application and post it on Mac research.
If you just want to ask the community a question about, about
your application, about functionality, anything like that,
there's a bunch of people from Mac research here at the
conference, who are going to be at the science connection on
and off and just throughout you can meet them.
But I encourage you if you haven't
checked this out, to please do so.
And I think even nicer is as of I think in a couple
of weeks, shortly anyway, they've redesigned the site
and it's going to go live with a new look that's much
more interactive and it'll be more user friendly.
So I think we'll get even more people using Mac research as
a resource and really fantastic place to focus the audience.
So I encourage you to, to make
as much use of this as you can.
Okay, finally as I promised, I'm going to talk about the
Mac products guide because we really encourage and want to,
I want to end with this, to encourage you to make sure
that your application description and the information
about your application in the Mac products
guide is compelling and up to date.
And if you're not in, alls it takes is a quick submission
to get yourself listed on the Mac products guide.
Our customer do use this resource to
find out what applications are available.
So if you're not there you're probably missing out.
So with that, I'm going to turn the presentation
over to Simon Patience, thanks for you attention.
( Applause )
>> Thank you.
Good afternoon.
I'm Simon Patience.
I'm the vice president of Core OS,
that's the Unix part of Mac OS X.
So today I'm going to talk about four
areas that influencing science
and are driving the direction of scientific computing.
And the idea is to basically show you the influence
that Apple is having in these various different areas.
So let's start off with the first
one which is data management
( Period of silence )
So the trends in data management is that
fundamentally there's an explosion of data.
And it's driving scientific computing
in, in various different ways.
A scientist from John Hopkins was
predicting that there will be more data collected
in the next five years than in all
of previous recorded human history.
So that's a pretty amazing statistic.
Now when you have all this data, you have to manage
it and by manage I don't just mean store it on a disk.
You have to find better ways to, to
organize it, to be able to search it,
to be able to find the, the information in there.
And that creates a new set of challenges for
us and sort new database infrastructures.
In addition, we're getting data sources from
increasingly different and diverse places.
Multiple different instruments, but
also different geographic areas.
And so that creates, creates a new set of problems.
And so now it's got to the point where we
have so much data that it's more important now
to find the information that's hiding in that
existing data than it is to get new data.
( Period of silence )
So here's an example of the data explosion.
This is Gen Bank which is a public accessible
central database of genetic information.
One of the largest of its type in the world.
And in the last few years, last five years, we have grown
from 17 billion to 75 billion entries in the database,
the number of base pairs in the, in the database.
This is a growth rate of doubling in every 18 months.
So we're basically going exponential
here in the growth rate.
Another source of large amounts of data is the
large Hadron Collider at Cern, Switzerland.
This is a proton proton and heavy ion
collider, so it's a really sort of atom smasher.
Its 27 kilometers in circumference,
one of the largest in the world.
40 million collisions per second.
So this machine, this system can
produce 10 pedabytes of data per year.
That's a huge amount of data to be able to analyze.
This is scheduled to start in September this year.
So the next thing is that we've got, you know
when we gather all this data, the next problem is,
is not only to store this data,
but you know how do you process it?
And so what we really want is you know your super computer.
So what's, you know what sort of computer would
you want to process this sort of information from?
We're not talking about necessarily where you'd store it.
But you know to process this information,
you need a decent sized machine.
So we look at storage, the memory,
processor and obviously it needs to be MP.
So you know three terabytes of storage
is a reasonable amount to keep your sort
of working set of data in I guess, you know.
So 16 gigabytes of memory would be a good amount
of memory to, to be able to process reasonable sets
in you know three gigahertz zones obviously,
that's a fast, fast processor and naturally 64-bit,
large amounts of data, 64-bit processors are essential.
And MP of course you need to be able to
build crunch these numbers effectively
So let's have eight of them.
All right what would this super computer look like?
It looks like that.
Which is pretty amazing that you can get all that computer
power in that box and you throw in a 30 inch displa0y
or in this case a 5 inch display by the look of things.
Then it's an amazing amount of power that Apple
can bring into your desk, desk side basically.
To help you process this huge quantity of data.
And to show you what, what we can do with such a large
amount of data, we have, I'd like to Marion Ho up to,
who is a science partnership manager at Apple, to demo a
64-bit OsiriX on a dataset that is pretty challenging.
( Applause )
>> So one of the big problems in medical
imaging its, its actually one of the,
one of the driving forces is, so just switch over here.
One of the driving forces in medical
imaging is just the amount of data.
So what, one of the, one of the, so as we
mentioned, OsiriX is one of the, its one of the,
its one of the very popular dicom,
what we call medical dicom viewers.
A medical imaging viewer.
If you're looking at data from things like CAT scanners.
And of course CAT scans, CAT scanners for
those of you in the medical field know they,
we can generate a lot of data out of those things.
Right here we have about 3000 slices,
represents about 4 gigabytes of data.
And what we're seeing is actually we're seeing
OsiriX here in 64-bit on Leopardd, running,
running all those street house slices in memory
in a side by side, in a side by side study.
Why is this impressive you might say?
Well, it's all gray and everything.
Well, well and frankly, if you think about it, if you
before 64-bit and before we could get, we could do this on,
on the Mac with OsiriX, you really only had two options.
You, you're dealing with 32 bit, so you
had, you had to use more virtual memory
or you had to down sample your size, your dataset.
And neither of those choices is obviously preferable
with you know with virtual memory you run into a lot
of performance issues and with
down sampling your sample, you are,
you're starting to possibly lose
data, just to put that in perspective.
You know, you're looking seven millimeters slices here.
You know you start missing every other slice and
you start missing possible nodules or pieces of,
or cancer regions that are, that are
smaller than that slice you just missed.
So it's really important that we can see all this data.
And that's really what OsiriX
is showing us here with 64-bit.
Now one of the things though is you
know we have all this data, so lets,
you know there are other things we can do with this data.
We can also look at it in once we have all this in,
we can actually also look at it in three dimensions.
And that's something that OsiriX does really well.
We can take all this, these 1500 slices and, and compress
them and put them into a, into a three dimensional view.
And, and what I wanted to show you, actually
is this kind of data in three dimensions.
So let's see here.
Let's do some demo.
So we, you know we're in here and
we're looking at some data.
And so we can, so that's taken the slices and
its, and its, we've put it in three dimensions.
And now we can see the, the model, the anatomical models.
What we're actually looking at what
is the bottom half of a person.
And, and so what you're basically seeing, so what
this really basically shows us is that in addition
to just seeing the stuff in two dimensions, we
can also you know we can also visually see this,
this kind of data in three dimensions in a,
in a way that's more intuitive and natural,
not just to doctors but to average users.
And that's really the power of having 64
bit and having this dataset available.
And, and fully available to, to the rest of the programs.
So kind of with that I just wanted to lead
into what Simon is going to talk about next
which is, is large scale data visualization.
So thank you.
( Applause )
>> So that's a brief discussion about
data management and like Marion said,
we've now gotta talk about you know what you do
when you've got all this data, how do you look at it
and how do you start to see what
information is hiding in there.
So for data visualization you know this, this
data explosion has been basically requiring us
to get more sophisticated visualization
techniques and so forth.
So the trend is been towards realistic
virtualization in 3D models.
The of high performance networking
basically means that we are actually,
we're able to move this data around far more effectively.
And what that means is that we have a,
a much greater demand for being able
to have high performance visualization pretty much anywhere
as you have the ability to, to move, move both the data and,
and the, the visual, visualization around the world.
And one of the answers to this is, is to use display walls
to be able to use the, this large scale visualization
of complex data to be to see what is hiding inside the data.
Basically looking for the information hiding in there.
And the difference is that display
walls are high resolution.
We have a big screen here, but this is not high resolution.
And the, the high resolution walls are really up to
things like 200 mega pixels and they show the big picture.
As opposed to just you know the, the wide data.
So you can zoom in on the data that you're actually looking
at and find the details that are hidden in that picture.
So the other thing we want to talk about
is going towards 3D visualization.
So this is a picture of, of 2D
data and the interesting thing is
that you can see a number of different images of 2D data.
And the wall provides some insight into what's going on.
When you see it in 3D and this is the same data by the way
that you saw in those 2D slides, you get a huge improvement
and insight into what that data is actually hiding.
It's much easier to visualize the problems.
And these are using regular sort of
Apple technology, so OpenGL and,
and the Mac pro's multi CPU hardware, 64-bits and so forth.
And that allow you to be able to do this kind of processing,
to produce these images, that give you these insights.
Display walls are becoming increasingly
more useful and used.
This one is actually the hyper wall at UC Irvine.
This is a 50, 30 inch Cinema Display wall.
So it has a 200 mega pixel resolution.
There are 25 Macs behind this,
Mac pros rendering these images.
So basically they're using commodity hardware,
here Apple displays and Apple computers.
And the interesting thing about these display walls
is that it's a centralized resource and so scientists
from various disciplines are sort waiting to use the wall.
And they start to collaborate in a more productive way,
sharing ideas from their own disciplines with each other
to create new ways of, of solving their problems
and finding information about their own data
by using techniques to used in other disciplines.
The one thing about this though is that you know
it's a, while the hardware is relatively simple,
you know and commoditized, the software is custom
software and it's a relatively complex task to be able
to partition your job up and send it out to
these render engines which then display all this.
However, there is a solution.
So Chromium is an open source software package
available for being able to run these large display walls
and Tungsten Graphics has announced yesterday
that it's brought enhanced Chromium for Mac OS X.
So this is a way for you to take your OpenGL programs
without modification and, and Chromium can run many of these
without modification to put your
data up onto a display wall.
We also have Quartz Extreme.
This is a new feature in Leopard
that allows you to take your,
your data and with, this is a, not a programmable thing.
This is, this is Quartz Composer that allows
you to, to display your data on a display wall.
This is not quite the, as large
scale as, as the Tungsten solution.
But it also helps you basically more simply get your
data through simple software means to commodity hardware
to high resolution displays to be able
to do the analysis is a much better way.
So the combination of visualization and the
intermixing of science disciplines as they have
to use these central resources has produced interesting
results and new techniques in, in analyzing data.
And so what I would like to do now is to introduce
Alyssa Goodman from Harvard to talk about her experiences
in new techniques with astronomical medicine.
( Applause )
Thank you.
>> Well I'd really like to thank Apple for inviting me here.
And thank Simon for really giving a perfect
introduction to this short presentation.
We've started a new organization at Harvard
called the Initiative in Innovative Computing,
whose goal is to essentially address all of the
challenges that Simon is talking about today.
So dealing essentially with the explosion of
data that really is taking place right now.
And with the need to process the
data, store the data, share the data,
collaborate on the data, visualize the data, etcetera.
And so instead of giving you a whole talk about the
mission of the IIC, which is very similar to the mission
of this session, I'm going to talk
just about one project which is near
and dear to my heart, which is called astronomical medicine.
And so let me explain how I got involved in a project like
the IIC itself and specifically in astronomical medicine.
So I'm an astronomer and in that capacity I
study how stars like the sun and stars not
like the sun form all over our galaxy and in other galaxies.
And in order to do that, what we wind up doing is taking
a large number of images at many different waves lengths
that also include spectrally resolved images,
so essentially three dimensional images
that I'll talk about in a few minutes.
But we image these very large regions
of mostly our galaxy that form hundreds,
thousands or in some cases millions of stars at once.
And what we're trying to do is to pick apart
the physical properties of these regions,
so things like what's the density, what's the velocity
of the material, what's the temperature of the material.
And what do physical models of how this kind of material
evolves over time tell us about the population of stars
that could form from this kind of material.
So what is traditionally done in astronomy or
was traditionally done is that people specialize
in particle wave length regimes because
this is difficult to do the observations.
And so what's not done as much as it should
be, but it is done increasingly more now,
is to combine the results from
all of these different techniques.
So it's sort of in the medical world like combining
CAT scans, MRIs, CT scan, PET scans, etcetera,
all in the same patient to try to get a fuller
view of what's going on with that patient.
So this patient here is called the Perseus molecular cloud.
It's about 700 and something light years away from us.
And its forming thousands of stars that the same time.
And what you see here is an image where in the
background you have a historical optical photo,
the colored stuff that you see here is omission from
dust that's taken with the Spitzer space telescope.
The color contours of what I'm going to talk about
more in a couple of minutes and the very small,
those of you sitting in the front can see
all these little red and blue markings
that are particularly important
so called star forming cores.
The point here however is that I was
invited to a meeting a few years ago,
this is just to review here what
the different kinds of data are.
And again, just to emphasize that I'm
going to be talking specifically more
on the talk about these so called 13 CO contours.
But I'll get to that in just a second.
And so I was telling this story about the need to integrate
this kind of data at a meeting that was sponsored jointly
by the National Science Foundation
and the National Institutes of Health
at the National Institutes of Health
campus in Bethessa.
And it was organized by the graphics and visualization
community in computer science with the premise
that the visualization community in computer science
had quote unquote failed the scientific community.
And that they had gone off and done
things that were interesting to them
but that weren't particularly useful for science.
And so at that meeting, if I can just go back here for
a minute, I was explaining this kind of data and saying
that wouldn't it be incredibly nice if there better ways
to browse through all this information and in particular
that showing a contour map of the particular kind of so
called molecular structural lighting that we were interested
in was a crime because in fact it was three dimensional data
and what we were showing was essentially
a smooshing of all of the data together.
It's not unlike looking at that person you were looking
at before from the bottom and taking the whole bottom half
of their body and kind of adding it
up in that it doesn't mean very much.
But that's what the green contours
in this, in this image mean.
So I told you that the premise of the meeting
was Viz has failed the scientific community.
That's my friends Hans Peter Fitzer who's now employed
at Harvard at the Initiative in Innovative Computing.
He also was from Mitsubishi Electric research labs.
And then here in the audience today, I don't know
where he is, but is Michael Halle whose there
at that top and then there's, there's me.
And so Mike was in the audience when I was
giving a presentation about those challenges.
And he came up to me afterwards
and he said, oh we can help you.
No problem.
You know we do this all the time in medical imaging.
And so he and I started collaboration.
And we said, you know alright, well if this is so easy,
let's just go get an undergraduate
to do a thesis about this.
( Laughter )
No biggie.
Okay? And so there's the, hey the word
unsuspecting was removed from my slide.
Okay that used to say unsuspecting undergraduate.
Her name is Michele Borkin and
she now works at the IIC as well.
And so we said, okay, you know there's some formatting
incapabilities and some problems with coordinates
and well one's astronomy and one's
medicine, but this shouldn't be that hard.
And she did it.
Okay? And the story is a little bit more complicated
than that, but basically the tools that were available
and the software which, which does all
run on standard commodity Mac hardware
in particular, made this remarkably easy.
And so let me just show you some of the
results and what it is that we learned.
But before I do that, let me just
explain here just a little bit more.
If you saw the demo before of, of OsiriX,
you'll know why this is not working.
( Period of silence )
I, I did click several times.
Okay.
( Period of silence )
Okay, guys.
Alright, well.
We'll show you in just a second.
Now you got it.
Okay, the trick is to go several slides forward and then
backward in the presentation should this happen to you.
Okay, so anyways.
So in medical imaging you're familiar with
the kind of technique where you scan forward
and backward through slices of someone's head.
And because you have a context of
what someone's head and the inside
of their brain looks like, this will work for you.
Okay, but if I show you this movie
here, you're going to say what is this?
okay, and what is this is the inside of that star forming
molecular cloud that I showed you and the different slices
that I'm scrolling through correspond to
different velocities which roughly correspond
to different distances in three dimensions.
Okay, so those three dimensional, sorry those green
contours I showed you are made up of the sum of all
of those bits of dimension at different velocities.
So if I show you instead this same image that you saw before
and then I saw you the movie on
top, which isn't on top anymore.
So never mind, use your imagination.
And in these contours, okay, what you would see is
the filling of those contours by the sum okay of all
of the emission at all of these different velocities.
And because I wasn't able to show that to
you on the image, you have a better picture
of how people usually try to analyze this.
Okay? And so what they'll do is they'll
look at those kind of movies and they'll try
to reconstruct structures in three dimensions.
So what did Mike and Michele and our friends at the ICC do?
Well, using OsiriX and also other software called
3D Slicer, which are both based on ITK and VTK,
we were able to take this and turn
it into a three dimensional movie.
( Period of silence )
I saw it work before when we went through the slides.
Okay, here you go.
So, thank you very much.
( Applause )
Okay, so that is very much the equivalent of what you
saw in OsiriX before of taking two dimensional data
and making it three dimensional and things like
being able, by the way just in, in keynote,
okay to take this transparent movie and manipulate it
like this and try and figure out what 2D structures map
to what 3D structures is incredibly useful to us.
And things like this big arch of
material that you see here, okay.
Nobody even knew that that was there.
People thought that there were two different clouds
at two different distances that weren't connected.
And this actually changes our interpretation
of how stars form in this region.
So just so that I end on a, on a moderate note rather
than making you think that we have this all solved,
I just want to let you know that the kind of size of
dataset that I'm talking about is roughly what Simon
and Liang were referring to as a really
large medical image at the moment.
So you're talking about something like 10
to the 8th foxels worth of information.
However, we have other projects that we're working
on at the IIC right now where the kinds of solutions
that we have philosophically would
work, but technically they won't work.
So for example we have one project that has to
do with combining electron microscope images,
slices and then tiling them and building up a 3D volume
of wha=t the brain looks like at 5 nanometer resolution.
And if you do that for half a millimeter of brain tissue,
half a millimeter cube, you get 10 to 14th voxels, okay?
A million times more than the data cube is just showed you.
And I'm sorry but that doesn't
fit even in 16 gigabytes of RAM.
So we need to do something more clever,
there's a challenge for all of you.
And we also need to be very clever
about what you need to see.
So what Simon was alluding to also
is that this data explosion means
that you can't look at all your data anymore.
And so you have to be very careful about having tools that
let you browse selectively and informed by the knowledge
of that particular discipline where
you're looking at the data.
Just for reference, if you took
the half millimeter of brain tissue
and tried to do the whole brain,
instead you'd get 10 to the 22 foxels.
So the last thing I wanted to show you is that we
actually have released the code for the 3D Slicer version
of astronomical medicine project
and you can go get that online.
And then to share the results of our work, we've
actually investigated and are now using a technology
which I'll show you over here where you can actually take
the results and put them in a regular PDF file, okay,
so this is just Acrobat Reader open right here.
And then what I'm going to do is click in
this figure, which shows you a portion
of the Perseus molecular cloud conflicts
that I was showing you before.
And then I'm going to be able to do
something pretty cool, okay.
And so, okay, yeah.
Okay, so on my machine that shows it to you in
real time and doesn't disappear while it moves.
But in any case, you can manipulate this 3D volume
and see if from any direction that you want.
And you can also turn off and on particular
layers that you do or don't want to see.
And so that's inside of a paper.
So somebody can go to say Nature's website and take
the paper version that looks like that and say,
oh I really wish I could see that cube from the side.
And obviously you could do the same thing
with a medical image or a molecular structure.
So I would just like to conclude and thank the large
number of collaborates only some of whom are shown here.
And turn things back over to Simon.
Thank you.
( Applause )
>> Thank you.
We need slides back please.
So that again goes to show that even
presentations are not an exact science.
Sorry. So data visualization.
The next thing I'd like to talk about is, is the
collaboration and, and networking aspects of science.
And as we've just seen, you know
collaboration is very important to be able
to help solve these more complex problems as we get sort
of cross pollination of feeding different ideas into,
to how to address a hard problem in one
domain which is solved easily in another.
And you know it just goes to show that no
one in as expert in everything and so it,
we really benefit from, from this collaboration.
And the other interesting thing is that you know we have
technologies which are you know now second nature for
for most people even outside the science
realm, in the kazoomo space,
you know email obviously everybody's you
know wouldn't, couldn't live without.
iChat is pervasive.
And with the advent of high speed networks, you know
in, in our lives, allow you know real time disposal of,
of much more rich information and
also allows more powerful tools.
So we have now video iChat and we have
white boarding in 3D and stuff like that.
So a combination of this, the online central data
repositories, you know this very large databases that are
in the world now that are sort of focusing, concentrating
the data into one place for wide spread storage
and sharing throughout, throughout
the disciplines and things
like the virtual observatories, Gen Bank that we saw before.
Is creating a whole interesting,
new environment to collaborate with.
And in fact there is some interesting use of tools.
So OsiriX for example is using iChat
Theater to share screen images between,
between collaborating doctors in real time.
Now they've done this by using some sort of in the past
anyway, by using some undocumented capabilities in Tiger.
Which we've now sort of formalized
in Leopard to become iChat Theater.
So we can see sort of the collaboration increasing
people's productivities as they can sort of share the,
the data that they have with their
colleagues in other places.
And this really just sort of emphasizes the, the importance
of being able to do complex technical visualization.
So what I'd like to do to, to demonstrate
this and to talk about this, this,
this fascinating technology is
to invite Jay Lyerly up onto stage --
he's the Senior Macintosh developer
from CEI -- to talk about Insight.
( Applause )
Here you go.
>> Thanks.
Hi, my name is Jay Lyerly and I'm a software developer
for Computational Engineering International.
We're a small software firm located
outside of Raleigh, North Carolina.
We make a package called Insight.
It's a, this is Insight here.
It's a package for the visualization and
analysis of both scientific and engineering data.
Here we have a simple model loaded up this is airflow
over some high electronics and heat flow study.
And this is the kind of interface you see when you
bring up Insight on your, a laptop or you workstation.
Insight also supports clusters.
We do computational clusters where the, the cluster
nodes do number crunching kind of activities.
And we do graphics clusters where all the different
cluster nodes take place in, in distributed rendering.
Here's a snapshot taken from the super
computing conference last fall in Apple's booth.
This is one of our graphics engineers explaining
that behind this wall there are a half dozen Mac pros
working together to, to render this image in parallel.
And the resulting image is, is completely interactive.
You can spin this around, manipulate the model, do
animations just like you would with Insight on your desktop.
Now in the past computational clusters and display walls
like this were really the domain of our larger customers,
the national labs, large industrial customers like that.
One thing we're trying to do with the Mac
platform is to bring these high end technologies
to small groups and even individual users.
To that end we use several Apple technologies on the Mac.
First off we have QuickTime components
for our custom video format.
This allows users to create high quality
engineering animations in Insight
and then pull those directly into
things like iMovie and Final Cut.
We use Apple Script in Bonjour to make
launching Insight in a closer mode easier.
This makes, this makes setting up a cluster
much more, much simpler and much more dynamic.
You can imagine walking into a conference room where
there's the display wall and dynamically connecting that to,
to that display wall from, from your MacBook.
64-bit computing is also very important.
In Tiger we ship 64-bit computational core.
In Leopard we're extending that to
full 64-bit graphics top to bottom.
This is really important for our customers.
They are well into this 64-bit memory space.
And we're really excited to be able to offer that
competitive big memory support on the Mac platform.
Another new feature we're adding
in Leopard is iChat Theater.
And it's going to go a long way to help increasef
the usage of Insight as a collaborative tool.
I'm going to spend the next few minutes talking
about how we've done that integration
and what that means for our users and how that's going to work.
So my background is actually in astrophysics.
And as we saw a few minutes ago, it's a very visual field.
Also in astrophysics there's a
lot of collaboration going on.
You can imagine a theoretician developing stellar
models who wants to share that information
with his observer colleague, who's
usually at a different facility.
They really need some software to be able
to do that interactively in real time,
where they can discuss what's going on and look at the
model and see how you know orientation or temporal evolution
of that model effects what's going to be observed.
And so this is of course important in astrophysics, it's
important in a lot of other fields, these collaboration,
these type of collaborations come up all the time.
And we've recognized that for a while in developing Insight.
And even gone so far as to put a
collaboration mode into Insight.
And we've had sort of varying degrees of success with that.
So the older Insight collaboration
mode, mode works sort of like this.
I bring up my model, I have it loaded into Insight.
I would call my collaborator on the phone, tell
them to launch Insight, give them some information
about what machine to connect back
to, and they would make a connection.
And if all that goes well, everything works and they can
see what I can see, as I you know go ahead and do analysis
on this model, I manipulate the
geometry, they see that in real time.
So, so once this is connected and,
and all running it works great.
But there are several hurdles that are
kinda nontrivial to get to this point.
First off, both I and my colleague have to have Insight.
So that's really going to limit the pool
of people that I can collaborate with.
Also usually when you want to collaborate in this fashion,
the person's you know not at your, at your location.
They're somewhere else far away.
So they're not on your local network, you need
to worry about IP addresses and host names,
you need to worry about firewalls and port
forwarding to make sure those connections can happen.
You might have to get your network admin involved.
And so there's, there's a lot of things
to get right to get this to work,
so it's really kind of a high barrier of entry
So we want to know, we're looking
for a way to make this easier.
And to make this simple enough that our
users could do it without really worrying
about how it works and use it on almost an everyday basis.
So of course last year at WWDC, iChat Theater was announced
and this seemed you know ready
made for what we needed to do.
So we started looking into that.
iChat Theater of course is geared toward Cocoa
applications, Insight is actually an X11 application.
So we implemented this in a, in a helper
application called Insight Theater,
yeah Insight Theater in itself is just a little Cocoa
app whose job it is to pull our imagery straight
out of Insight and make that available for iChat.
So this is how it works from an end users perspective.
Start in the same place, I've got my model loaded up
in Insight and I want to share that over the Internet.
This time I'm going to collaborate with my
colleague Amanda whose somewhere out there
on the Internet with her Macintosh running iChat.
So I start up my video conference, there's Amanda,
and there I am in the little Insight preview window.
And now I'm ready to start the Insight Theater.
So I click in Insight, launch the helper app.
It comes up.
I hit the start theater button.
And now my Insight preview has gone away and
it's replaced by the content from Insight.
And from Amanda's point of view, she sees a full iChat
AV window with the same thing I'm looking at in Insight.
And of course this is all real time as I manipulate my
model, do analysis, do animation, she's going to see that.
And we have the voice chat going on in the background.
So this is actually pretty easy.
We just, you know I brought up my model in Insight,
I've started my iChat AV session and in two clicks,
I'm sharing the imagery straight
out of Insight over the Internet
to my colleague who all I have to have is a Macintosh.
So this addresses quite a few of the hurdles we saw before.
Instead of having to have everybody to have Insight to
do this, I just need the other person to have iChat.
And so if we think back to the astrophysics example where
the theoretician wants to collaborate with the observers,
observers typically don't have tools like Insight.
It is a real high end computational things.
So that was a collaboration that wouldn't happen before.
So now with this technology, its, its made available you
know as a much greater chance that that could happen.
From a developer stand point from wanting to sell
software, this is really great because every time one
of my customers uses Insight in this way,
they're basically doing a mini commercial for me.
They're doing a tour of my software.
They're showing their colleague how they're using Insight
in a very domain specific way to
do analysis and do useful work.
And so that's really a plus from a developer's perspective.
From a practical stand point it also
solves all our network problems.
No longer do you have to worry
about IP address and host names,
you just have to find your buddy
in the buddy list and click on him.
You don't have to worry about setting up
firewalls and port forwards just for Insight.
This is all piggybacked off iChat.
So if iChat works and you can do video
conferences, then Insight Theater is going to work.
So we're pretty happy with Insight Theater.
It's going to ship in the fall with
our release of Insight for Leopard.
That's the full 64-bit Insight.
As far as developing, we've been very happy with how
easy it is to, to interface with Insight Theater.
I keep joking that it actually took me longer to
make these slides than it did to do the integration.
So I think it does really going to be a big boon for our users.
Its, it's going to be something they're going to find
really useful and they're going to be able to,
to use in their daily workflow to share their
work where they really couldn't do it before.
And as, as a user I'm hoping to see iChat theater
in lots of other Mac applications this fall.
So in closing, feel free to check out our Insight and
our other applications at www dot insight dot com.
Thanks.
( Applause )
>> So that's collaboration and networking, being able to use
standard sort of consumer based tools and Apple technology
to be able to do interesting things
with sharing information.
So the next thing I'd like to talk
about is class grids and grid computing,
just in case that you know little
super computer that you bought earlier
on in the presentation didn't quite do
all the computation that you needed.
So we have this really large datasets.
You know sometimes that it's just too much for one machine.
And these, you still need to find the
information that's finding in that data.
You need to mine it.
We have the high speed networks now that
are able to, to connect machines together
and this is really what's driving large grids.
We have there's a couple of examples
at different types of grids.
You have dedicated grids, you know single
organization building up racks of machines
to be able to provide the grid as a service.
But then we also have a number
of people who have noticed that,
that they have machines sitting
around and not doing anything.
And they can harvest these bare cycles.
And some of these are over pretty
wide scale such as setting at home.
And but other things, states Kentucky and Maine,
have also noticed that they have a huge pool
of machines sitting in their schools doing nothing at night.
And so they're sort of getting the spare
cycles out of their K12 Macs to be able
to reuse that as part of scientific research.
And the interesting thing about those things that's sitting
in the classrooms are actually
there now all multicore and 64-bit.
So they are surprisingly powerful machines sitting
there, that they can harvest these, these networks.
Because almost the entire part line of Mac,
all the four quadrants of the MacBook,
MacBook Pro, iMac and the MacPro are all 64-bit.
So here are some examples of some, some dedicated clusters.
So we have sort of teragrid.
This is a 250 teraflop cluster,
30 pedabytes of data storage.
It's the world's largest distributed
infrastructure for open science research.
We also have the open science grid.
This process around about 15000 jobs a
day, 30 simultaneous jobs during peak hours
and has over 50 locations in the global grid.
And finally we have the Mac open grid.
The interesting thing about this
one is that it's a 100 percent max.
So 500, 500 node machine I believe, 100 percent max.
The last one that I'd like to talk about
is the Kentucky Dataseam Initiative.
And so I'd like to introduce Brian Gupton who's the
CEO over the Kentucky Dataseam Initiative to come
and talk about how they build their grid.
( Applause )
Thank you.
>> Thanks.
( Applause )
Don't worry, Apple didn't design this.
Good afternoon, I'm, I'm glad to be here
and talk to you about something that,
that is very dear and special to me, this program.
And to talk to you a little bit and share about something
that's going on that really special in the state
of Kentucky that's not only driving research,
but it's changing the future of many lives.
It's saving some lives.
And it's almost bringing additional
opportunity and changing perceptions
and expectation sets for the citizens of Kentucky.
So what is Kentucky Dataseam Initiative?
State wide grid computing initiative,
it was founded in 2003.
We're based in Louisville, Kentucky.
We have 47 participating school districts that represent
about 250000 of the state's approximately 600000 students.
The regions you see colored there, that's very important
to the grid because these counties in the state
of Kentucky all are coal producing counties
that is counties that, that produce coal.
And coal and tobacco are two of our major
industries in the state of Kentucky.
We take our name from, from that reasoning.
We look at seams of data to bring our, our economy
into a 21st century environment where coal fueled much
of our economy for, for many, many years.
So why do we do this?
Well, three things.
We want to advance commericalizable research.
That is research that moves from the theoretical to the
practical and has an opportunity to create a product,
create a job and to expand our
tax base in the state of Kentucky.
We use that commercializable research as an opportunity
to drive educational advancement within the state.
One of the things that we have a tremendous challenge
of in the state of Kentucky is getting our young male
and female students both to pursue careers in the sciences.
And, and many times in the state of
Kentucky we are bringing in students from,
from outside the state who utilize
Kentucky based scholarships
and stipends to do work in our research institutions.
And they often go back home or they go and, and form
companies that compete against Kentucky opportunities.
And that's a challenge for us in the state because we are
wanting to not only create a critical mass of opportunity
but a critical mass of understanding
why science is important and how science
and education can directly relate to jobs and opportunity.
So as I alluded to earlier, we're looking to drive
and diversify our economic development in the state.
For many years, our tax base completely subsisted of
some degree of manufacturing but also coal and tobacco.
And so what we had to do in the state was bring in some
enterprise that was reflective of the 21st century eco!nomy.
And as a part of that, the Cabinet for Economic Development
created a department of commercialization and innovation
to drive knowledge based jobs in the state and
create knowledge based opportunities for the sons
and daughters of coal miners and, and farmers.
And as a part of that, they created a bucks for
brains program to attract researchers to the state.
And it's been very successful.
And as a part of a study that we did in 2003, we
looked at our researchers as a traditional business.
And we had to continue to give those researchers
infrastructure to allow their research to grow and continue
to be successful or those researchers were going to leave.
They'd go to another institution just
like you would any traditional business.
So and even down to for you history
buffs, in looking at economic development.
That's a, that's a picture of Lyndon Johnson, he
sited his war on poverty right in Appalachia in one
of the counties that were we're working
in which you saw on the map earlier.
So, if you take anything away about the program,
it can be summed up as kids, cancer, computers.
We had an existing base of computers in the state of
Kentucky and as a part of this program to continue
to drive research and opportunity, we were
able to receive funding to build out this grid.
So not only are we looking at grid computing as, as
you all well know grid computing is a tremendous way
to get more out of what you already purchased.
But we in Kentucky look at grid
computing as a way to anticipate purchase
of assets to be able to get that win win.
Big difference.
So as a part of this, this grid, the
data seam, we have 5100 computers.
It's the largest 100 percent Apple grid
on the planet from what we understand.
It's comprised of G4s, G5s, Intel based iMacs and
MacPros, just sitting in the state's environment.
So what are we doing with it?
We're working with the University of Louisville, the James
Graham Brown Cancer Center, they're part of the bucks
for brains researchers team that we have in the state.
They also had a proven track record
of being able to create cancer drugs.
And the challenge we had when we met
with them originally was that they had,
they had identified eight different targets.
But because of their internal computing capacity,
they could only work on two at any given time.
And so we know that that's, that's a
problem for their funding, being able to,
to generate additional funding dollars, pursue funding
and grant opportunities as well as move those drugs
and those opportunities onto the next level.
So the University of Louisville is working on
structure based drug design as you well know,
our next generation of cancer therapies
are those that are cancer specific.
Not toxic side effects.
The University of Louisville had, as I said earlier, had
a proven track record in those and actually brought one
through trials that was 67 percent effective in
stage three patients with no toxic side effects.
So as a part of the infrastructure that we've brought to
this, to the program, that eight targets has been able
to grow to 20 with a more expansive
investigation of each of those targets.
And we've been able to increase the libraries
that they're investigating those targets
against from 300000 to over three million libraries.
So the technology that's involved.
Of course, the Mac OS X environment has been key to it.
It's been very easy for our researchers to
recompile applications code that they already have
on their dedicated assets in that
environment to run on our grid.
And so there's a tremendous cost
savings there because they're not having
to go out and assume other types of software.
The Xgrid it's built in and we all know about that.
The Intel architecture has been key for us.
The move to the Intel chip has allowed the machines
that we're putting in the environment to process
that research much faster and with better results.
And then of course with the Apple Remote Desktop
application, we're able to remotely manage that grid
because as you can tell, not only is our
grid remote, but some of those application,
or some of those environments in
Appalachia are pretty remote too.
And, and so that application has been very vital to us to be
able to pick up and, and manage the grid at any given point.
So the future.
We've talked a little bit about the research,
but it's, it's important to take pause here
and let you understand the educational
aspects of what we're doing.
To let you, to let you know the types of machines
that we're putting in, it was a C change.
It was big difference in Appalachia.
To let you know some of the computers that we were
replacing were, were IBM value points running OsiriX.
Yeah. And, and they were using
these as educational machines.
And we know that that's not reflective of an environment
that you're going to send a student upon
graduation out into the world, we hope not.
And, and so the technology that's coming in
is very new and very key to helping us raise
that next generation of scientists and researchers.
And its, and we're seeing things happen in these
school districts where the teachers, the students,
they're getting excited about these opportunities.
They understand the importance of their role
in doing things to change their communities.
They understand that it's going to take them
creating those opportunities and understanding
and expectation sets that, that they may not be coal miners.
They may not be farmers.
And science is okay for boys and girls.
And trust me that's a challenge.
And, and so part of our message is,
is trying to address both genders and,
and their role in pursuing scientific opportunity.
So as we move forward with these
computers in the school districts,
we've got like I said, 5100 machines out there right now.
We're going to be putting another two to 3000
machines on the grid by August of this year.
As a part of the program, we bring scientists
and researchers from our university as well
as teaching professors from our other partnering
institution, Moorhead State University out to the districts
to talk to the kids about opportunities in science.
We give the researchers a chance to start developing
that talent, that one day can start filling positions
in their labs and, and start to grow that critical
mass of opportunity and understanding in the state.
As a part, as a part of the program,
as I said, we've got new technology
and it's very different than, than
what the teachers are used to.
We, we've trained 1400 teachers statewide in
the better use of technology in the classroom
and we'll train another 1000 teachers
by the end of the year.
As a part of the program, we also have scholarships
and are working with the University of Louisville,
their understanding that once you get these kids excited
for science, you have to give them a path to move on out.
And so they've put nearly a half a million dollars
together for data seam scholars for students
that want to pursue careers in math, science and engineering.
And of course, since this is a little bit different,
we're looking at other opportunities to expand the program
in states and countries because while we're not, we're not
the only people that are having this type of challenge.
And, and we're very excited about the types
of, types of things that are going on.
I want to conclude with two things
to, to let you know what's going on.
I brought this up here and as I, as I
said before, Apple didn't make this.
Jonathon Ive had no hand in, in this bucket.
To, to illustrate what's going on in the state
of Kentucky, this is a miner's dinner pail.
And this was high technology for
a lot of folks in our state.
This was the, this was the tried and true.
This is what they carried to work every day.
In fact, my father carried this one to work every day.
This is what I carry to work every day.
It's very exciting.
And I want to introduce you, the last
thing I want to do is introduce you
to some folks that are helping make this happen.
We've got some folks here in the front
row and I'd like for them to stand up.
Second row too.
( Applause )
These folks that are, that we just gave a hand to
are representatives from our states K12 environment.
And, and on top of everything else that they have to
do in the course of their day, in their normal job,
they're setting this grid up for
us, they're keeping it going.
And they're helping us change opportunities and
prospects and expectations in their school districts.
And they've been tremendous colleagues
and depending on the challenge
of the day they've been pretty good co
conspirators and they've been darn good friends.
And, and I wanted to thank them and as,
if you get a chance during the week,
pull them aside because I'm sure they
have more than one story to tell you.
So thank you very much.
( Applause )
>> So that's our coverage of clusters and grid computing
which actually concludes the section of the presentation.
So basically what we've talked about is that the data
explosion is, is really driving everything in science.
And the, the neat thing is that
Apple is basically addressing a lot
of these trends through the data side of things.
Being able to both store your, your data on, on commodity
pricing storage, being able to process it simply with,
with things like the Mac pro, through data visualization
with the commodity screens and the render farms.
Through collaboration technology there with iChat Theater.
And then in clusters and grid computing with large amounts
of actually sort of consumer based products being able
to take advantage of iMacs in, in
clusters, which is pretty amazing.
So at this point, I'd like to turn the, the
conversation back to, to Liz who will finish up for us.
( Applause )
>> Great. So before we go, I just wanted to
quickly go over a few things that I wanted
to highlight at the developer conference this week.
And I think because of the time we're going to be a little
short for Q and A, so I want to just let everybody know
that the speakers will be up in the science
connection on the third floor after the presentation.
So if you do have questions for
us or want to have a discussion,
we probably need to get out of the room as soon as I'm done.
And so just we don't want to cut off your question, but
you'll probably have to do it in the science connection.
So it's on the third floor.
So the first thing is the scientific development
poster session, how many people here have a poster?
Right on and those of you that don't why not?
( Laughter )
Okay, there's next year.
We want more next year.
630 tonight on the second floor corridor.
Please come, there's some fantastic work that's going to
be shown in these posters, they're just beautiful,
so please come and support the people
who did present posters this year.
We also have community discussion up in the science,
right across from the science community,
science connection area listed here.
Today we talked about collaborative technologies, we have
high performance computing, graphics computing tomorrow.
And some community discussion on Thursday.
On Friday there's a very specific, I think
we have this at the end, so let me wait.
Apple design awards are tonight as well.
And in the science connection, if you have an app that you
want to demo, we have systems up there that you're welcome
to load on to the system and demo for
anyone that's interested in seeing it.
Here's some sessions, I'm just going to skip this,
you guys know what you want to see here hopefully.
I want to talk for a minute about the display wall at WWDC.
If you haven't seen this, this is the graphics in media lab.
We, special thanks to Tungsten Graphics
for an incredible job importing Chromium
over to Mac OS X, in incredible, I think record time.
Its being shown every morning.
You can go see it, potentially play with it.
Every morning this week.
The afternoon we're going to be showing
the cords composer elements.
Cords Composer, the application they've built for the
show is now available in your Xcode developer tools.
So that demo app is now in Xcode.
So it, Cords Composer is the afternoon.
The Tungsten Graphics version of Chromium is in the morning.
On Friday we're also going to have a discussion section
with the Chromium Tungsten Graphics
rather engineers also during lunch time.
So that'll be our fourth lunch time session on Friday.
It's not on the calendar, so if you're
interested, make a note of it please.